The Age of Reason is over. In fact it ended long ago, but the symbols and language of Reason have been carried on to the present. We are now in an era that will get rid of these relics. The time has come to explicitly state what changed and start living in the new reality: a world after reason.

# The Age of Reason
Reason came to be thought of as the highest good during a particular period in time and space. When Europe divided into religious sects that fought some of the bloodiest wars in memory, the elite sought something to bind sects together. Reason was introduced as a universal replacement for religion, a universal good that could mediate international relations. At its most extreme, the French revolutionaries invented a literal "cult of Reason" with statues and worship services. The cult of Reason failed to catch on, but the apostles of reason achieved their goal: power shifted from from kings and clergy to merchants and intellectuals. This was a shift from power grounded in tradition to power grounded in demonstrable skills, in commerce or in reasoning. Both meant a shift from the community to the individual as the fount of power. Intellectuals from different countries bonded over this conviction. Access to writing and better systems of delivery allowed unprecedented communication across the continent, and the intellectual class imagined themselves as a "republic of letters". 

Their conception of "Reason" was the arbiter of truth. It implied an objective truth, independent of culture and psychology.

This conception was, and is, a fiction. It was a useful fiction for uniting the cause of scientific progress and engineering. The fiction of standpoint neutrality played a major role in Europe's technological advancement, which in turn allowed Europe to colonize the rest of the world. Regardless of its utility, though, a fiction is still a fiction. As soon as individual nations had the power to potentially conquer their neighbors, they abandoned the idea that Reason was a neutral judge in international relations. Some saw Napoleon as the appointed steward of Reason (and so not subject to it). This made Reason a tool to serve the selfish purposes of the ruling class. Reason then morphed into the handmaiden of ethnic nationalism. The rise of fascism and communism are often presented as a rejection of the Enlightenment, but it would be more accurate to call them a _reductio ad absurdum_ of the Enlightenment project. The cult of Reason appeared twice in history: the first time as a farce, then second time as a tragedy. Reason became the property a particular group of people, allowing them to perpetrate the worst moral horrors of the millennium.

# The Rise of Law
In the ashes of the Second World War, there was no appetite to rebuilt the intellectual foundation of rationality that had been torn to pieces by total war, genocide, and mass mobilization. Reason was shown to be a fraud, but no one wanted to admit it. People were too busy rebuilding the physical world. So, the language of Reason carried on. Intellectuals embraced its symbols while rejecting it in essence. What this means is that _Reason as such_ was no longer acceptable, but the _process of reasoning_ could continue. Whereas the process of reasoning had been seen as a means to the end of the Truth, reasoning would now be seen as the end itself. In the Age of Reason, the endpoint of reasoning was the Truth. Now we would engage in the process of reasoning to produce an endless series of propositions, while never claiming to know the truth about any of them. As such, philosophers could no longer be the trusted guardians of the Truth. They handed the keys over to the lawyers. When you say it starkly, it sounds ridiculous. The job of a lawyer is often to obscure the truth, seemingly the opposite of a philosopher. But they did it anyway. This was like replacing a golden treasure with a documentary about treasure.

This shift to the Law was so successful that people no longer understand how you could live without it. Books about past eras project the standards of a "rules-based international order" onto the past, which is an idea no one alive at those times would have understood. The rule of Law is a very new idea, and makes no sense to most people from most times. Even now,it is mostly an obsession of a very small group who adopted it as a universal standard after 1945. 

# What Comes Next?
The rule of Law was always an illusion. It was always doomed to eventual failure because it was built on an even weaker foundation than the cult of Reason. The true power holding up the Law was always the American military and the economy that supported it. As soon as American dominance ended, the "rules-based international order" became an anachronism.

I am not very happy about this development. I was raised to love the rule of Law, and I really do believe it is the best way to do things. This is just my own sentiment, but if given a choice I would make the current order permanent. When I say that Reason is dead and that we need to prepare for the next era, I am in no mood to celebrate. I am among the mourners. Still, it is what it is. We need to prepare for what comes next.

Here are some predictions about what will change:

* Judges out: In the rule of Law, the highest authority is the judge. Or even more powerful than one judge is a committee of judges (such as the Supreme Court in the United States). This is untenable. Judges will lose their prestige. They will become servants to politicians. The job of politicians became less and less interesting after 1945. Politicians turned into clowns as a result. The new world will continue to have a lot of clowns in politics. But it opens space for great figures (it also brings back the risk of tyrants).
* Prophets in: A hallmark of the age of Reason was the decline of religion. The militant atheists failed to destroy religion. In the following era of the Law, the compromise of secularism was imposed. Under secularism, religion was given absolute freedom within any area of life that was considered inconsequential. After reason, the prophets will return. Religion will renew. 
* Mediation ends: Under the rule of Law, disputes are arbitrated by higher bodies. The UN was created to mediate between nations, federal governments set rules for states and cities. This isn't going to work anymore. Hopefully, we won't see a return to warfare to settle disputes. But we're not going to do it by lawfare anymore. There will be pressure campaigns, social shaming, tariffs and blockades to get what we want.
* Fewer lawsuits, less regulation: The great achievement of the rule of Law was the reduction in violence. Wars became less destructive. Crime became less common. Legal activity was a good way to push out destruction. However, the cost of further reductions in violence rose to unsustainable levels. We ended up with too much red tape and too many lawsuits. We couldn't say or do anything anymore. This development is going to be overthrown faster than anyone expects. The logic of bureaucracy requires constant expansion of regulation (and so regulators), a conclusive break with this trend will cause an implosion of the regulatory state.
* Create, don't predict: Lastly, the business of prediction will decline. Prediction is the highest art if we assume a single reality, and that all disputes are caused by confusion rather than conflict. This assumption is incorrect. People will rediscover that we don't really agree on fundamental principles, and so will be a lot more interested in hearing advocacy than predictions. Statistics had its day in the sun, it will be in the shadows for at least the next century.

# Separating Wheat from Chaff
I have two hopes in describing what is happening:

1. Reduce the argument surface for meaningless pandering by the mastodons of an antiquated craft. The apostles of reasoning will never stop doing their thing, but hopefully we can stop having to listen to them.
2. Try to identify worthwhile technologies within the rule of Law. Although it will no longer order our understanding of the world, the process of reasoning has many useful results and any practical benefits are worth preserving.

Toward this second goal, I will try to specify what I think can and should be preserved from the outgoing rule of Law.